Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) 
 
1.  Who is eligible to apply? 
 
A foreign national, who was eligible to become a citizen of India on 
26.01.1950 or was a citizen of India on  or at anytime after 26.01.1950 or 
belonged to a territory that became part of India after 15.08.1947 and his/her 
children and grand children, provided hi s/her country of citizenship allows 
dual citizenship in some form or othe r under the local laws, is eligible for
registration as an Overseas Citizen of India (OCI). Minor children of such 
person are also eligible for OCI. Howeve r, if the applicant had ever been a 
citizen of Pakistan or Bangladesh, he/she will not be eligible for OCI. 
 
2.  Who was eligible to become  Citizen of India on 26.01.1950? 
 
Any person who, or whose parents or grand-parents were born in 
India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally 
enacted), and who was ordinarily residing in any country outside India was
eligible to become citizen of India on 26.01.1950. 
 
3.  Which territories became part  of India after 15.08.1947 and from 
what date? 
 
The territories which became part of India after 15.08.1947 are: 
 
(i)  Sikkim 26.04.1975 
(ii)  Pondicherry 16.08.1962 
(iii)  Dadra & Na gar Haveli 11.08.1961 
(iv)  Goa, Dama n and Diu 20.12.1961 
 
4.  Can the spouse of the eligible person apply for OCI? 
 
 Yes, if he/she is eligible in his/her own capacity. 
 
5.   Can Minor children apply for OCI?
Yes, if either of the parents is eligible for OCI. 
 
  6.  In what form should a person  apply for an OCI and where are the 
forms available? 
 
A family consisting of spouses and upto two minor children can apply 
in the same form i.e. Form XIX, which can be filed online or downloaded 
from our website www.mha.nic.in. 
 
7.  Can application form be filled and submitted on lin e? 
 
Yes. Part A of the application form can be filed online. Part B can be
downloaded and printed on computer or by hand in Block letters. Printed 
Part A and Part B of the application form has to be submitted to the Indian 
Mission/Post/Office. 
 
8.  What documents have to be  submitted with the application? 
 
The following documents shall be enclosed for each applicant: 
 
1. Proof of present citizenship 
 
2. Evidence of self or parents or grand parents, 
 
(a)  being eligible to become a citizen of India at the time of 
commencement of the Constitution; or
commencement of the Constitution; or 
(b)  belonging to a territory that became a part of India after 
15 th August, 1947; or 
(c)  being a citizen of India on or after 26 th January, 1950 
 
These could be: 
 
(i)  Copy of the passport :or 
(ii) Copy of the domicile certificate issued by the Competent 
authority ;or 
(iii) Any other proof. 
 
3.  Evidence of relationship as pa rent/grand parent, if their Indian 
origin is claimed as basis for grant of OCI.
4.  Application fee by way of Demand Draft (US $ 275 for each 
applicant or equivalent in local currency; US $ 25 or equivalent  in local currency for each PIO card holder).  In case of 
application filled in India, fee Rs.14,230/- for general category 
and for PIO card holders Rs.1,290/- to be paid by way of 
Demand Draft. 
 
5.  PIO card holders should submit a copy of his/her PIO card. 
 
9.  What documents would qualify for “Any other proof” for
evidence of self or parents or grand parents being eligible for 
grant of an OCI? 
 
Any documentary evidence like a school certificate, land ownership 
certificate, birth certificate etc. by which eligibility may be reasonably 
ascertained. 
 
10.  How many copies of applic ation have to be submitted? 
 
Application has to be submitted in duplicate for each applicant. 
 
11.  Whether applicant(s) have to go in person to submit the 
application (s)?
application (s)? 
 
No.   Application(s) can be sent by post either by Speed post or 
Registered post only and not through Courier. 
 
12.  Whether the applicant (s) have to take oath before the Counsel of 
the Indian Mission/Post? 
 
No. Earlier provision in this regard has been done away with. 
 
13.  Where to submit the application? 
 
To the Indian Mission/ Post of the country of citizenship of the 
applicant. If the applicant is not in the country of citizenship, to the Indian
Mission/Post of the country where he is ordinarily residing. If the applicant 
is in India, to the FRRO Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkota or Amritsar or to FRRO, 
Chennai or to the Under Secretary, OCI Cell, Citizenship section, Foreigners 
Division, Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), Jaisalmer House, 26, Mansingh 
Road, New Delhi-110011. 
  14.  Can a person apply in the country where he is ordinarily 
residing? 
 
Yes.  
 
15.  What are the consequences of  furnishing wrong information or
suppressing material information? 
 
All the applications will be subject to pre or post enquiry depending 
on whether any adverse information is voluntarily reported in the application 
or not. If the Government comes to the know that any false information was 
furnished or material information was suppressed, the registration as OCI 
already granted shall be cancelled by an order under section 7D of the 
Citizenship Act, 1955. The persons will also be blacklisted thereby banning
his/her entry into India. 
 
16.  What is the fee for applicat ion for registration as an OCI? 
 
US $ 275 or equivalent in local currency for each applicant. In case 
of PIO card holder, US $ 25 or equivalent in local currency for each 
applicant.   In case of application filled in India, fee Rs.14,230/- for general 
category and for PIO card holders Rs.1,290/- to be paid by way of Demand 
Draft. 
 
 
 
17.  What is the time taken for registration as OCI?
Within 30 days of the application, if there is no adverse information 
available against the applicant. If any adverse information is available 
against the applicant, the decision to grant or otherwise is taken within 120 
days. 
 
18.  If the registration as an OCI is not granted, what amount will be 
refunded? 
 
An amount of US $ 250 or equivalent in local currency shall be 
refunded, if registration is refused. US $ 25 is the processing fees, which is
non-refundable. In case application filled in India, Rs.1,290/- will be non-
refundable being processing fees.   
19.  Can a PIO Cardholder apply? 
 
Yes, provided he/she is otherwise eligible for grant of OCI like any 
other applicant. 
 
20.  Will the PIO Cardholder be granted an OCI registration gratis? 
 
No. He/she has to make a payment of US $ 25 or equivalent in local 
currency along with the application & Rs.1,290/- in case of application is 
filled in India.
filled in India. 
 
 21.  Will the PIO card be honored till the time it is valid even after 
acquisition of an OCI? 
 
No. PIO card will have to be surrendered to the Indian 
Mission/Post/MHA for grant of OCI registration certificate and an OCI ‘U’ 
visa sticker. 
 
22.  What will be issued a fter registration as an OCI? 
 
A registration certificate in the form of a booklet will be issued and a 
multiple entry, multi-purpose OCI ‘U’ visa sticker will be pasted on the
foreign passport of the applicant. For this purpose, the applicant has to send 
the original passport to the Indian Mission/Post after receipt of the 
acceptance letter/ verifying the status of the application online. 
 
23.  Will a separate OCI passport be issued? 
 
No. 
 
24.  Will a duplicate certificate of registration as an OCI will be 
issued? 
 
Yes. For this purpose, an application has to be made to the Indian 
Mission/Post with evidence for loss of certificate. In the case of
mutilated/damaged certificate an application has to be made enclosing the 
same. The applications in both the cases have to be made to the same Indian 
Mission/ Post which issued the certificate along with payment of a fee of US  $ 25 or equivalent in local currency & Rs.1,290/- in case of application is 
filled in India. 
 
25.  Will a new OCI visa sticker be pasted on the new foreign passport 
after the expiry of the old passport? 
 
Yes. On payment of requisite fee, a new OCI ‘U’ visa sticker will be
issued. However, the applicant can continue to carry the old passport 
wherein the OCI ‘U’ visa sticker was pasted along with new passport for 
visiting India without seeking a new visa, as the visa is lifelong.  
 
26.  Will the applicant lose his citizenship after registering as an OCI? 
 
No. As only citizen of the country which allows dual citizenship 
under the local laws in some form or the other are eligible for applying for 
registration as an OCI, losing foreign citizenship does not arise.
27.  Can a person registered as an OCI travel to protected 
area/restricted area without permission? 
 
No. He/she will be required to seek PAP/RAP for such visits. 
 
28.  Would the Indian civil/crimina l laws be applicable to persons 
registered as OCI? 
 
Yes, for the period OCI is living in India. 
 
29.  Can a person registered as an OCI be granted Indian citizenship? 
 
Yes. As per the provisions of section 5(1) (g) of the Citizenship Act,
1955, a person who is registered as an OCI for 5 years and is residing in 
India for 1 year out of the above 5 years, is eligible to apply for Indian 
Citizenship. 
 
30.  Will an OCI be granted gratis to certain categories of people? 
 
No. 
 
31.  Can OCI be granted to foreign nationals who are not eligible for 
OCI, but married to persons who are eligible for OCI?   
No. 
 
32.  Will foreign-born children of PIOs be eligible to become an OCI?
Yes, provided one of the parents is eligible to become an OCI. 
 
33.  What are the benefits of an OCI? 
 
Following benefits will be allowed to an OCI: 
 
(a)  Multi-purpose, multiple entry, lifelong visa for visiting India. 
(b)  Exemption from registration with local police authority for any 
 length of stay in India. 
(c)  Parity with NRIs in respect  of economic, financial and   
education fields except in matters relating to the acquisition of 
agricultural/plantation properties.
agricultural/plantation properties. 
 
34.  Will any other benefit be granted to an OCI? 
 
Any other benefits to an OCI will be notified by the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) under Section 7B(1) of the 
Citizenship Act, 1955. 
 
35.  Is the OCI entitled to voting rights? 
 
No. 
 
36.  Is the OCI entitled to hold  constitutional post in India? 
 
No. 
 
37.  Is the OCI entitled to hold Government posts in India? 
 
No, except for the posts specified by an order by the Central 
Government.
Government. 
 
38.  If a person is already hold ing more than one nationality, can 
he/she apply for OCI? 
  Yes, as long as the local laws of at least one of the countries allow 
dual citizenship in some form or the other. 
 
39.  What are the advantages of the OCI when compared to PIO 
cardholders ? 
 
(i)  An OCI is entitled to life long visa with free travel to India 
whereas for a PIO card holder, it is only valid for 15 years. 
(ii)  A PIO cardholder is require d to register with local Police
authority for any stay exceeding 180 days in India on any single 
visit whereas an OCI is exempted from registration with Police 
authority for any length of stay in India. 
(iii)  An OCI gets a specific right to become an Indian Citizen as in 
29 ,whereas the PIO card holder does not have this. 
 
40.  Whether an OCI be entitled to apply for and obtain a normal 
Indian passport which is given to a citizen of India? 
 
No. Indian Passports are given only to Indian citizen.
41.  Whether nationals of Commonwealth countries are eligible for the 
OCI? 
 
Yes, if they fulfill the eligibility criteria. 
 
42.  Can a person renounce OCI? 
 
Yes. He/she has to declare intention of renunciation in Form XXII to 
the Indian Mission/Post where OCI registration was granted. After receipt 
of the declaration, the Indian Mission/Post shall issue an acknowledgement 
in Form XXII A. 
 
43.  Do the applicants who have applied on the earlier prescribed
application form have to apply again in the new form? 
 
No. All such applications will be considered for registration as an OCI 
without seeking fresh applications and fees.
